>> Thompson: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SUNDAY, JUNE 26.
THE POTENTIAL COSTS OF LEAVING
THE EUROPEAN UNION, FOR
FOREIGNERS LIVING AND WORKING IN
THE U.K.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
UNEXPECTED MEDICAL BILLS THAT
ARE NOT COVERED BY YOUR HEALTH
INSURANCE.
>> I'M THINKING THERE'S NO WAY
I'M GOING TO PAY THIS.
THIS IS INSANE.
>> Thompson: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
MEGAN THOMPSON.
>> Thompson: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
BRITAIN SAYS IT WILL SET ITS OWN
TIMETABLE FOR LEAVING THE
EUROPEAN UNION.
FOLLOWING THURSDAY'S REFERENDUM,
WHERE A MAJORITY OF BRITISH
VOTERS SIDED WITH EXITING THE
28-NATION BLOC, TODAY BRITAIN'S
FOREIGN SECRETARY SAID THE
TIMING OF THE SPLIT IS ENTIRELY
FOR THE U.K. TO DETERMINE.
MEANWHILE, AN ONLINE PETITION TO
THE BRITISH PARLIAMENT CALLING
FOR A RE-VOTE HAS OBTAINED THREE
MILLION SIGNATURES.
REPORTING FROM LONDON IS OUR OWN
HARI SREENIVASAN WITH THE LATEST
DEVELOPMENTS.
HARI?
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING
MEGAN.
I ASKED ONE OF THE MEMBERS OF
THE COMMITTEE WHAT THIS MEANS,
HE SAID WITH 100,000
SIGNATURES GETS A DEBATE, IT
DOESN'T CHANGE THE LAW.
TWO OR THREE MILLION PEOPLE
DECIDE TO SIGN THE PETITION
THAT'S ALL IT MEANS.
>> WHILE THE EUROPEAN UNION
WHILE THE EUROPEAN UNION WAITS,
THERE'S NO WORD ON WHEN THE
UNITED KINGDOM WILL FILE ITS
DIVORCE PAPERS.
THIS WAS BRITISH FOREIGN
SECRETARY PHILIP HAMMOND IN AN
INTERVIEW TODAY.
>> THERE IS NO IMPERATIVE ON US
TO SERVE THE NOTICE AT ANY
PARTICULAR TIME.
THE REFERENDUM IS AN INTERNAL
MATTER.
THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT AS A
MEMBER OF THE EUROPEAN UNION IS
ENTITLED TO SERVE THAT NOTICE.
>> Sreenivasan: SCOTLAND WANTS
TO STAY IN THE E.U. AND, AND
TODAY, SCOTLAND'S FIRST
MINISTER, NICOLA STURGEON, SAID
SHE IS CONSIDERING TWO STEPS--
BLOCKING THE BREXIT BY
WITHHOLDING THE SCOTTISH
PARLIAMENT'S "LEGISLATIVE
CONSENT" AND SCHEDULING A
REFERENDUM ON SCOTTISH
INDEPENDENCE FROM THE U.K.
>> WHAT IS GOING TO HAPPEN WITH
THE U.K. IS THAT THERE ARE GOING
TO BE DEEPLY DAMAGING AND
PAINFUL CONSEQUENCES OF THE
PROCESS OF TRYING TO EXTRICATE
THE U.K. FROM THE E.U.
I WANT TO TRY AND PROTECT
SCOTLAND FROM THAT.
>> Sreenivasan: WHILE BRITISH
PRIME MINISTER DAVID CAMERON,
WHO LED THE REMAIN CAMPAIGN, HAS
SAID HE WILL RESIGN, THERE ARE
NOW CALLS FOR OPPOSITION LABOR
PARTY LEADER, JEREMY CORBYN, TO
DO THE SAME, FOR HIS
SHORTCOMINGS IN THE REMAIN
CAMPAIGN.
>> WE NEED STRONG AND EFFECTIVE
LEADERSHIP OF THE LABOUR PARTY.
I TOLD JEREMY CORBYN LAST NIGHT
THAT I NO LONGER HAD CONFIDENCE
IN HIS LEADERSHIP.
>> Sreenivasan: IN ROME TODAY,
U.S. SECRETARY OF STATE SAID THE
U.S. AND ITS ALLIES WOULD WORK
TO PROVIDE CONTINUITY AND
STABILITY IN EUROPE AND MINIMIZE
ECONOMIC DISRUPTION.
>> WE WILL CONTINUE, THE UNITED
STATES, TO HAVE A VERY CLOSE AND
SPECIAL RELATIONSHIP WITH GREAT
BRITAIN.
WE VALUE THAT RELATIONSHIP, THAT
DOES NOT CHANGE BECAUSE OF THIS
VOTE.
>> Sreenivasan: ANXIETY IN THE
MARKETS AND IT CAUSED THE
BRITISH POUND TO PLUNGE IT ALSO
CAUSED A LOT OF ANXIETY AMONG
THE IMMIGRANTS WHO ARE LIVING
AND WORKING HERE.
THEY'RE TRYING TO FIGURE THEIR
WAY FORWARD IN A CHANGING
NATION.
THE MASTER DINER IN CENTRAL
LONDON SERVES UP HEARTY ENGLISH
MEALS TO A STEADY STREAM OF
REGULAR CUSTOMERS.
MANAGER SERGIO FREITAS
ORIGINALLY FROM PORTUGAL, MOVED
TO BRITAIN 20 YEARS AGO.
THIS WAS HIS LAND OF
OPPORTUNITY.
>> AT THE TIME THAT I CAME, IT
WAS VERY EASY, BECAUSE IT WAS
PART OF THE E.U.
UNTIL TODAY, I'VE NEVER DONE
PAPERS.
I'VE ONLY HAD THE PORTUGUESE
PASSPORT.
IT'S GOING TO BE MUCH MORE
DIFFICULT.
WE'RE GOING TO NEED TO APPLY FOR
VISAS AND EVERYTHING, ALL OF
THOSE STORIES.
IT'S GOING TO BE MUCH, MUCH MORE
DIFFICULT TO GO OUT AND TO COME
IN.
>> Sreenivasan: SINCE HE ARRIVED
IN 1996, SERGIO'S WORK HAS BEEN
STEADY AND UPWARDLY MOBILE, AND
HE LIVES NEAR A LARGE EXTENDED
FAMILY, 80 COUSINS IN ALL.
>> THE JOB HAS BEEN THE BEST
THING I HAVE, WHICH HAS BEEN
GREAT.
FOR 10 YEARS, I'VE BEEN WORKING
SO I'VE GOT HOUSE, CAR, I'VE GOT
EVERYTHING, FAMILY.
DON'T KNOW EXACTLY WHAT'S GOING
TO HAPPEN.
>> Sreenivasan: SO MANY MEMBERS
OF THE SERVICE INDUSTRY IN
LONDON ARE FOREIGN-BORN, AND FOR
THEM THE REFERENDUM MEANS
UNCERTAINTY FOR THEIR
LIVELIHOODS AND THEIR FUTURES.
IN LONDON, ALMOST THREE-QUARTERS
OF HOSPITALITY SECTOR WORKERS
ARE FROM SOMEWHERE ELSE.
25-YEAR-OLD WAITRESS MICHAELA
FAIA EMIGRATED FROM ROMANIA FIVE
YEARS AGO.
SHE'S THREE MONTHS PREGNANT WITH
HER FIRST CHILD AND IS NOW
UNSURE, AFTER HER BABY IS BORN,
IF THEY'LL BE ABLE TO STAY.
>> I'M A BIT SCARED IN ONE WAY.
I WILL SEE IF I CAN APPLY FOR MY
RESIDENCE, SINCE I HAVE ALREADY
MORE THAN FIVE YEARS SINCE I
LIVE HERE.
>> Sreenivasan: SHE HOPES TO
OBTAIN A PERMANENT RESIDENCY
CARD, BUT IF SHE DOES NOT GET
IT, SHE DOES NOT WANT TO GO BACK
TO ROMANIA.
>> IT WOULD BE HARD, BECAUSE I
DON'T HAVE SO MANY OPPORTUNITIES
TO FIND A JOB.
BUT WE'LL SEE.
>> Sreenivasan: ANOTHER CONCERN
IS THE WEAKENING OF THE BRITISH
POUND SINCE THE REFERENDUM.
THAT COULD LEAD TO INFLATION,
PINCHING WORKERS' POCKETBOOKS.
>> EVERYTHING IS GOING TO GO UP.
PRICES, I DON'T KNOW WHAT'S
GOING TO HAPPEN, BUT I THINK
IT'S GOING TO BE A CATASTROPHE.
>> Sreenivasan: GEORGE, WHO GAVE
ONLY HIS FIRST NAME, IS A
REGULAR CUSTOMER HERE, AND SEES
E.U. MEMBERSHIP DIFFERENTLY.
HE VOTED FOR BRITAIN TO LEAVE,
HOPING HIS FUTURE MIGHT BE MORE
LIKE HIS PAST.
>> I VOTED FOR IT.
>> WHY?
WELL, I DON'T THINK WE SHOULD BE
DOING WHAT OTHERS COUNTRIES TELL
US TO DO.
I THINK LIFE WAS BETTER BEFORE
1974, WHEN I WAS YOUNGER.
>> Sreenivasan: GEORGE BELIEVES
IMMIGRANTS, OFTEN WILLING TO
WORK FOR LOWER WAGES, COST THE
NATIVE BRITISH JOBS.
>> I THINK THERE'S TOO MANY
IMMIGRANTS OVER HERE.
I DON'T MIND THEM.
THEY'RE DOING THEIR JOB, BUT
THEY'RE STILL DOING ENGLISH
PEOPLE OUT OF WORK.
>> IT IS ABSOLUTELY INCORRECT TO
SAY THAT 'E.U. IMMIGRANTS THAT
ARE TAKING MY JOBS AWAY FROM
ME.'
>> Sreenivasan: LONDON SCHOOL OF
ECONOMICS PROFESSOR SWATI
DHINGRA SAYS HISTORICAL EVIDENCE
SHOWS OTHERWISE, AND ACTUALLY
FOREIGN-BORN RESTAURANT WORKERS
ARE AMONG THOSE LIKELY TO FEEL
THE "BREXIT" EFFECTS ACUTELY.
>> THE SERVICE SECTOR IS 80
PERCENT BRITISH ECONOMY, SO
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT SOMETHING
HAPPENS IN SERVICES IT WILL BE
FELT EVERYWHERE.
>> Sreenivasan: PAUL SCULLY IS A
CONSERVATIVE PARTY MEMBER OF
PARLIAMENT REPRESENTING A
BOROUGH IN SOUTH LONDON THAT
VOTED TO LEAVE THE U.K.
HE SPLIT WITH PRIME MINISTER
DAVID CAMERON TO SUPPORT THE
LEAVE CAMPAIGN TOO.
>> WE NEED TO MANAGE OUR
IMMIGRATION NUMBERS, BUT IN A
FAIR WAY.
>> Sreenivasan: M.P. SCULLY SAYS
HE EXPECTS IMMIGRANTS ALREADY IN
BRITAIN WILL BE SAFE.
>> WE WENT TO A SHOP YESTERDAY
WHERE THE MANAGER HAS BEEN HERE
FROM PORTUGAL FOR 20 YEARS.
HIS WAITRESS IS FROM ROMANIA,
SHE'S BEEN HERE FOR FIVE.
SHE'S PREGNANT WITH HER FIRST
CHILD AND NOW THERE'S A CLOUD OF
UNCERTAINTY SHE GOING TO STAY,
HER CHILD IS GOING TO BE BRITISH
OR NOT.
>> YEAH, I THINK THERE'S BEEN A
LOT OF RHETORIC IN THIS
CAMPAIGN.
I DON'T THINK ANYONE IN THE
MAINSTREAM IS SAYING THAT WE
WOULD DO ANYTHING WITH THE
PEOPLE WHO ARE ALREADY HERE.
WHO ARE ALREADY PROVIDING
SERVICES THAT ARE SUPPORTING OUR
ECONOMY, ENRICHING OUR CULTURE
AND COMMUNITIES.
THEY NEED TO BE WELCOMED.
AND ACTUALLY THEY NEED TO HEAR
THE MESSAGE-- THAT THEY ARE VERY
WELCOME.
>> Sreenivasan: BUT FOR FOREIGN
WORKERS LIKE SERGIO, THE COMING
SEPARATION FROM THE E.U. LEAVES
HIM FEELING UNEASY.
>> I'M REALLY NOT SURE WHAT'S
GONNA HAPPEN, BUT EVERYONE AT
THIS POINT IS VERY SCARED OF IT.
SO WE'RE GOING TO SEE WHAT'S
GOING TO HAPPEN.
FOR THE FUTURE.
>> Sreenivasan: AS YOU CAN SEE
MEGAN IT'S A TENSE TIME FOR
PEOPLE HERE IN BRITAIN.
>> Thompson: HARI SREENIVASAN,
WE'LL SEE YOU TOMORROW ON THE
PROGRAM, THANKS HARI.
>> Sreenivasan: THANKS MEGAN.
>> Thompson: IN A 2014
REFERENDUM, SCOTLAND DECIDED TO
REMAIN IN THE U.K., BUT NOW
SCOTTISH LEADERS ARE CALLING FOR
A DO-OVER, PUSHING TO EXIT THE
U.K. IN ORDER TO PRESERVE
SCOTLAND'S MEMBERSHIP IN THE
E.U.
62% OF SCOTS VOTED LAST WEEK TO
REMAIN IN THE E.U., AND ONE POLL
PUBLISHED TODAY FINDS 59% FAVOR
INDEPENDENCE FROM THE U.K.
EARLIER, I SPOKE WITH NEWSHOUR
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT MALCOLM
BRABANT WHO IS IN THE SCOTTISH
CAPITAL OF EDINBURGH.
>> SCOTS VOTED OVERWHELMINGLY TO
REMAIN IN THE EU.
WHAT'S BEHIND THAT?
>> YOU CAN'T BELIEVE THE SORT OF
ANGER THERE IS UP HERE WITH THIS
WHOLE OUTCOME.
WHEN THE SCOTS DECIDED TO HAVE A
REFERENDUM TWO YEARS AGO TO VOTE
WHETHER OR NOT TO STAY IN THE
UNITED KINGDOM THE REASON WHY SO
MANY OF THEM DECIDED TO STAY IS
THAT THEY HAVE BEEN CONVINCED
THAT IT IS THE UNITED KINGDOM
WITHIN EUROPE WERE A BETTER
PLACE TO BE THAN OUTSIDE IT THEY
WOULD BE STRONGER WITHIN.
NOW THEY FEEL AS THOUGH THEY'VE
BEEN KICKED IN THE TEETH BY THE
ENGLISH ESPECIALLY AND THEY WANT
TO STAY.
>> WHAT HAVE YOU BEEN HEARING
FROM SOME OF THE SCOTS YOU'VE
BEEN TALKING TO?
>> FOR EXAMPLE, A WOMAN FROM
WOMEN FOR INDEPENDENCE, THEY
BELIEVE THAT SCOTLAND IS MUCH
PERT OFF WITHIN THE EUROPEAN
UNION.
ALSO SOMEBODY FROM THE SCOTLAND
BUSINESS ASSOCIATION, THEY
BELIEVE THAT SCOTISH BUSINESS
AND INDUSTRY WILL BE SO MUCH
BETTER WITHIN.
THEY'RE REALLY CONCERNED ABOUT
WHAT'S GOING TO HAPPEN.
THEY REALLY BELIEVE THAT THE
ENGLISH AND THE WELSH VOTED
WHELMING TO GET OUT OF THE
UNION.
THEY LED BY THE BLINDLY THEY'RE
REALLY DISTURBED BY THE WHOLE
SITUATION AND YOUNG PEOPLE IN
THIS WHOLE REFERENDUM ISSUE THAT
FEEL THAT THEIR FUTURE HAS BEEN
SOLD BY THE RIVER, BY ALL THE
PEOPLE VOTING FOR NOSTALGIA FOR
BRITAIN THAT PERHAPS NEVER
EXISTED.
>> THE FIRST MINISTER NICOLAS
STURGEON SAID THAT PERHAPS
SCHAND COULD BLOCK THIS IS SHE
REALISTIC?
>> I BELIEVE SHE'S DOING
EVERYTHING SHE CAN TO REMAIN
WITHIN THE EUROPEAN UNION.
BUT THAT IDEA HAS BEEN POO POOED
BY EXPERTS AND THERE IS NO WAY
THE SCOTTISH PARLIAMENT CAN VETO
IT.
>> Thompson: HOW ABOUT THE
CHANCE FOR ANOTHER INDEPENDENCE
VOTE IN SCOTLAND?
>> THAT'S CERTAINLY WHAT MANY
PEOPLE WANT HERE AND EVEN THOSE
WHO VOTED AGAINST THE REFERENDUM
LAST TIME HAS SAID, LET'S VOTE
FOR INDIANA.
>> Thompson: THANKS SO MUCH
FOR BEING WITH US.
>> THANKS MEGAN.
>> Thompson: ONE IN FIVE WORKING
AMERICANS WITH HEALTH INSURANCE
SAY THEY HAVE PROBLEMS PAYING
MEDICAL BILLS, AND THEY
FREQUENTLY USE UP SAVINGS,
INCREASE CREDIT CARD DEBT, OR
BORROW MONEY TO PAY THEM OFF.
THE BILLS ARE PART OF A GROWING
FRUSTRATION-- THE UNPLEASANT
SURPRISE WHEN YOUR PLAN PAYS
LESS THAN EXPECTED, SOMETIMES
BECAUSE YOU SAW A DOCTOR WHO,
UNBEKNOWNST TO YOU, WAS NOT IN
YOUR INSURANCE COMPANY'S
NETWORK.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
I WENT TO NEW JERSEY, WHERE
PATIENTS, DOCTORS, HOSPITALS,
AND INSURERS ARE AT ODDS OVER
HOW TO SOLVE THE PROBLEM.
>> Reporter: AFTER SUFFERING A
HEART ATTACK 20 YEARS AGO, LEIGH
LEHMAN OF HILLSDALE, NEW JERSEY,
DOES WHAT HE CAN TO EAT RIGHT
AND STAY IN SHAPE.
BUT THE 64-YEAR-OLD COMPUTER
CONSULTANT STILL HAS OCCASIONAL
HEALTH SCARES.
LAST SUMMER, DOCTORS TOLD HIM HE
NEEDED A QUINTUPLE HEART BYPASS.
BEFORE THE PROCEDURE, HE
CONFIRMED BOTH THE VALLEY
HOSPITAL, IN RIDGEWOOD, NEW
JERSEY, AND HIS SURGEON,
ACCEPTED HIS AETNA INSURANCE,
WHICH HE GETS THROUGH HIS
EMPLOYER, A SMALL CONSULTING
COMPANY.
>> BUT A FEW WEEKS LATER, AFTER
THE SURGERY, I GOT A BILL IN THE
MAIL.
>> Reporter: THE SURPRISE BILL
WAS FOR NEARLY $2,200.
IT WAS FROM A CRITICAL CARE
DOCTOR IN THE INTENSIVE CARE
UNIT WHO DID NOT ACCEPT LEHMAN'S
INSURANCE.
>> OUT OF NOWHERE, SOMEBODY WHO
YOU NEVER HEARD OF, I DON'T
REMEMBER MEETING, SENDS A BILL.
WHY IS HE NOT ACCEPTING THE
INSURANCE?
WHY IS HE OUT OF NETWORK?
>> Reporter: LEHMAN SAYS HE
CONTACTED THE HOSPITAL AND
INSURANCE COMPANY, BUT THEY TOLD
HIM THERE WAS THEY NOTHING THEY
COULD DO TO REDUCE THE BILL.
SO HE DUG INTO SAVINGS TO PAY
IT.
>> IT'S A LITTLE STRESSFUL.
YOU'RE TRYING TO RECOVER.
IT'S MAJOR SURGERY.
I MEAN, I FELT LIKE I WAS HIT BY
A TRUCK.
>> Reporter: SOMETHING SIMILAR
HAPPENED TO ANDREW HEYMANN, AN
ACCOUNTANT FROM HACKENSACK, NEW
JERSEY, WHO HAD HEALTH INSURANCE
THROUGH HIS EMPLOYER FROM ANTHEM
BLUE CROSS-BLUE SHIELD.
>> THERE WAS BLOOD AND GLASS ALL
OVER THIS PART OF THE PARKING
LOT.
>> Reporter: TWO YEARS AGO, WHEN
HE WAS HELPING A NEIGHBOR MOVE,
A LARGE GLASS TABLE SHATTERED,
AND A SHARD OF GLASS SLICED INTO
HEYMANN'S LEFT ANKLE.
AN AMBULANCE TOOK HEYMANN TO THE
CLOSEST EMERGENCY ROOM-- AT
HACKENSACK UNIVERSITY MEDICAL
CENTER-- WHICH HE KNEW WAS IN-
NETWORK.
HIS ANKLE WOUND WAS SO DEEP, THE
E.R. CALLED THE PLASTIC SURGEON
ON DUTY.
>> AND HE CAME IN, AND SEWED UP
MY LEG IN PROBABLY ABOUT 10
MINUTES.
>> Reporter: BUT THAT SURGEON
DID NOT ACCEPT HIS INSURANCE.
HEYMANN RECEIVED WHAT'S CALLED
A"
BALANCE BILL."
THE DOCTOR CHARGED CLOSE TO
$6,000.
BLUE CROSS COVERED ABOUT $860.
AND HEYMANN WAS STUCK OWING
$5,000.
>> I'M THINKING THERE'S NO WAY
I'M GOING TO PAY THIS.
THIS IS INSANE.
AND IT'S KIND OF ALMOST LIKE,
WHATEVER IF YOU WANT TO CALL IT,
FALSE ADVERTISING, WHEN YOU GET
SOME KIND OF A CRAZY BILL FROM
SOMEONE WHO'S NOT IN THE
NETWORK, AND YOU REALLY HAD NO
CONTROL OVER THE FACT THAT THEY
WOULD BE THERE.
>> Reporter: THE HOSPITAL
WOULDN'T DISCUSS THE SPECIFICS
OF HEYMANN'S CASE, BUT SAID IT
RECOGNIZES "THE CURRENT SYSTEM
IS NOT OPTIMAL."
AFTER SIX MONTHS OF FIGHTING HIS
BILL AND APPEALING WITH HIS
INSURER, HEYMANN DISCOVERED HIS
EMPLOYER, A LARGE EDUCATION
COMPANY, WAS SUPPOSED TO COVER
THE CHARGE, AND THE COMPANY PAID
IT OFF.
CHUCK BELL, PROGRAMS DIRECTOR AT
CONSUMERS UNION, THE ADVOCACY
ARM OF CONSUMER REPORTS, SAYS
THE FRUSTRATION OF SURPRISE
MEDICAL BILLS IS GROWING.
>> WE'VE RECEIVED, LITERALLY,
THOUSANDS OF STORIES FROM
CONSUMERS ALL OVER THE COUNTRY
THAT ARE HAVING THIS PROBLEM.
>> Reporter: LAST YEAR,
"CONSUMER REPORTS" FOUND THAT
30% OF AMERICANS WITH PRIVATE
HEALTH INSURANCE HAVE RECEIVED A
BILL WHERE THEIR PLAN PAID LESS
THAN THEY EXPECTED.
OF THOSE, 23% SAID THEY GOT A
BILL FROM A DOCTOR THEY DID NOT
EXPECT TO GET A BILL FROM.
AND 14% SAID THEY WERE CHARGED
HIGHER "OUT-OF-NETWORK" RATES BY
DOCTORS THEY THOUGHT WERE IN-
NETWORK.
BELL SAYS ONE REASON FOR
SURPRISE MEDICAL BILLS MAY BE
THAT INSURERS ARE INCREASINGLY
OFFERING "NARROW NETWORKS"--
CHEAPER INSURANCE PLANS THAT
GIVE PATIENTS FEWER DOCTORS TO
CHOOSE FROM.
>> BUT THE PROBLEM HAS BEEN THAT
IT'S VERY HARD TO ACTUALLY USE
YOUR NARROW NETWORK IN PRACTICE.
WHEN YOU ACTUALLY GO TO A
HOSPITAL OR AN EMERGENCY ROOM,
YOU INEVITABLY RUN INTO
PHYSICIANS AND PROVIDERS THAT
ARE OUT-OF-NETWORK, AND THEN
THOSE COSTS QUICKLY MOUNT UP.
>> Reporter: BELL SAYS SURPRISE
BILLS HAVE BEEN A PROBLEM FOR A
LONG TIME, BUT IT'S POSSIBLE
MORE PEOPLE ARE GETTING THEM,
BECAUSE MORE PEOPLE ARE INSURED.
SINCE THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT
PASSED IN 2010, 20 MILLION MORE
AMERICANS HAVE HEALTH INSURANCE.
>> AND PROBABLY MOST OF THOSE
PATIENTS DO NOT HAVE VERY RICH
OR GENEROUS OUT-OF-NETWORK
COVERAGE.
SO, WHEN THEY GET A BILL, THEY
MAY HAVE TO PAY THE WHOLE THING
BY THEMSELVES.
>> Reporter: LEIGH LEHMAN'S
$2,200 BILL FOR HIS HEART BYPASS
WASN'T HIS FIRST SURPRISE BILL.
THE YEAR PRIOR, HE WAS HIT WITH
A $4,500 BILL FOR A VISIT TO AN
EMERGENCY ROOM THAT TURNED OUT
TO BE OUT-OF-NETWORK.
LEHMAN SOLD SOME PROPERTY AND
USED MONEY SET ASIDE FOR HIS
DAUGHTER'S COLLEGE TUITION TO
PAY HIS BILLS.
YOU MAKE A GOOD SALARY.
>> YEAH.
>> Reporter: YOU HAVE WHAT YOU
CALLED GOOD HEALTH INSURANCE.
>> YES.
>> Reporter: DID YOU EVER THINK
YOU'D BE STRUGGLING TO PAY
MEDICAL BILLS?
>> NO.
IT'S PROBABLY GOING TO TAKE A
COUPLE OF YEARS BEFORE WE GET
BACK ON TRACK.
>> Reporter: WE WONDERED HOW
PATIENTS LIKE LEHMAN END UP
SEEING OUT-OF-NETWORK DOCTORS AT
AN IN-NETWORK HOSPITAL.
NEUROLOGIST JOHN NASR HAS A
PRIVATE PRACTICE IN NEW JERSEY
AND SEES PATIENTS AT THE VALLEY
HOSPITAL, WHERE LEHMAN GOT HIS
BYPASS.
BUT NASR IS NOT ON STAFF THERE.
INSTEAD, TO GET PAID WHAT HE
THINKS IS A FAIR RATE, HE HAS TO
NEGOTIATE HIS OWN INSURANCE
CONTRACTS.
AS A RESULT, HE'S NOT IN-NETWORK
WITH EVERY PLAN THE HOSPITAL
ACCEPTS.
>> OVER THE YEARS, INSURANCE
COMPANIES HAVE TYPICALLY REDUCED
PAYMENT, YEAR AFTER YEAR, TO THE
POINT THAT MANY INSURANCE PLANS
PAY BELOW WHAT MEDICARE PAYS.
AND THIS BECOMES UNSUSTAINABLE.
DOCTORS CAN'T PRACTICE LIKE
THAT.
>> Reporter: NASR SAYS EVEN WHEN
HE IS IN-NETWORK, SOME PATIENTS
WITH HIGH DEDUCTIBLES ARE
SURPRISED BY WHAT THEY OWE.
WHEN HE IS OUT OF NETWORK, NASR
IS PERMITTED TO BILL AT A HIGHER
RATE TO THE INSURANCE COMPANY
AND PATIENT.
SO, A PATIENT'S DONE HIS OR HER
RESEARCH.
THEY FOUND A HOSPITAL THAT'S IN-
NETWORK.
THEY'VE FOUND A PROVIDER THAT'S
IN-NETWORK.
BUT THEN THEY END UP SEEING A
DOCTOR LIKE YOU, WHO'S NOT IN-
NETWORK.
THE PATIENT WOULD PROBABLY SAY,"
THIS ISN'T FAIR."
>> YES, IT IS NOT FAIR FOR THE
PATIENT, I AGREE WITH YOU.
AS A PRACTICE, OUR POLICY IS TO
WORK WITH THE PATIENT ON OUT-OF-
NETWORK PAYMENT.
SO, WE UNDERSTAND IT IS A
HARDSHIP FOR THE PATIENT WHEN
THEY ARE SEEN URGENTLY BY A
PROVIDER WHO'S OUT-OF-NETWORK,
AND THEY DID NOT ANTICIPATE
THAT.
>> Reporter: DOESN'T THE DOCTOR
THEN HAVE A RESPONSIBILITY TO
INFORM THE PATIENT, 'HEY, I'M
NOT IN YOUR NETWORK?'
>> IF I'M TAKING CARE OF YOU IN
AN EMERGENCY, I DON'T EVEN LOOK
AT YOUR INSURANCE.
BECAUSE WE DON'T WANT ANYTHING
WE DO TO BE SWAYED BY INSURANCE.
>> Reporter: AND NEITHER DO
HOSPITALS, SAYS JOE DEVINE, THE
PRESIDENT AND C.E.O. OF KENNEDY
HEALTH, A CHAIN OF HOSPITALS AND
CLINICS IN SOUTHERN NEW JERSEY.
HE SAYS KENNEDY CAN ONLY REQUIRE
ITS CONTRACTED DOCTORS TO
PARTICIPATE WITH THE SAME
NETWORKS IT DOES.
>> WE CANNOT LEGALLY FORCE THE
INDEPENDENT DOCTORS TO
PARTICIPATE IN CONTRACTS.
UNFORTUNATELY, WHAT'S HAPPENED
IS THEY'RE SENDING BILLS TO
PATIENTS, AND WHAT WE'D LIKE TO
DO IS COME UP WITH A SOLUTION
WHERE WE DO NOT PUT THE PATIENT
IN THE MIDDLE OF THIS.
>> Reporter: WHEN A PATIENT
WALKS THROUGH YOUR DOORS,
DOESN'T THE HOSPITAL HAVE AN
OBLIGATION TO SAY TO THEM, "HEY,
YOU MAY BE IN-NETWORK AT THIS
FACILITY, BUT NOT ALL THE
DOCTORS YOU SEE MAY BE IN
NETWORK."
>> IN THE EMERGENCY SITUATION,
MOST PEOPLE ARE NOT THINKING
ABOUT IT.
WE'RE NOT GOING TO HAVE ALL OF A
SUDDEN SOMEONE COME OVER AND
SAY, "WELL, YOU KNOW, YOU MAY
GET AN OUT-OF-NETWORK BILL."
THAT'S NOT WHAT WE'RE HERE FOR.
WHEN THEY'VE DECIDED TO DO AN
ELECTIVE PROCEDURE, THE HOSPITAL
DOES HAVE NOTIFICATION FORMS
THAT ACTUALLY ALLOWS THEM TO
UNDERSTAND IT AND WHAT THEY MAY
BE RESPONSIBLE FOR.
>> Reporter: WHAT DOES THAT LOOK
LIKE?
IS IT A LETTER, A PHONE CALL?
>> WE HAVE A VOLUNTARY SHEET
THAT KIND OF SHOWS THEM THAT
THEY'RE OUT-OF-NETWORK AND WHAT
THEIR RESPONSIBILITIES WOULD BE.
WE ALSO HAVE IT ON OUR WEBSITE.
>> Reporter: HOWEVER PATIENTS
ARE NOTIFIED, DOCTORS STILL
COMPLAIN THAT THEY'RE OUT-OF-
NETWORK BECAUSE INSURERS DON'T
PAY THEM ENOUGH.
BUT KEVIN CONLIN REJECTS THAT
ARGUMENT.
HE'S THE CHIEF OPERATING OFFICER
OF HORIZON BLUE CROSS BLUE
SHIELD, NEW JERSEY'S LARGEST
HEALTH INSURER.
>> MORE THAN FOUR OUT OF EVERY
FIVE PHYSICIANS IN THE STATE ARE
IN-NETWORK WITH US.
SO, FOUR OUT OF FIVE FIND WHAT
WE MAKE AVAILABLE TO BE
REASONABLE.
>> Reporter: CONLIN SAYS
CARRIERS ALSO TAKE A HIT WHEN
DOCTORS AND HOSPITALS CHARGE
THEM AT OUT-OF-NETWORK RATES,
BECAUSE THERE'S NO LIMIT TO WHAT
THEY CAN CHARGE.
HE ESTIMATES NEW JERSEY'S
INSURERS PAY AROUND $2 BILLION A
YEAR TO COVER OUT-OF-NETWORK
CARE.
>> IT CONTRIBUTES SIGNIFICANTLY
TO OUR PREMIUM EXPENSE THAT'S
ABSORBED BY ALL NEW JERSEYANS.
>> Reporter: AND THAT'S WHY
INSURERS ARE PUSHING THE STATE
LEGISLATURE TO LIMIT THE AMOUNT
DOCTORS AND HOSPITALS CAN CHARGE
BUT DOCTORS AND HOSPITALS
STRONGLY OPPOSE THAT.
>> SO AS AN INDUSTRY, WE NEED TO
MAKE SURE WE PROTECT THE ABILITY
FOR THE INDIVIDUAL HOSPITALS TO
BE ABLE TO NEGOTIATE FAIR RATES
WITH THE INSURANCE COMPANIES.
>> Reporter: THIS STAND-OFF IS
LARGELY WHAT'S HOLDING UP A
BROADER BILL IN THE NEW JERSEY
LEGISLATURE.
IT'S ONE OF 28 STATES
CONSIDERING PROTECTIONS FOR
PATIENTS AGAINST SURPRISE
MEDICAL BILLS.
FOUR OTHERS-- ILLINOIS, FLORIDA,
NEW YORK AND CONNECTICUT-- HAVE
ALREADY PASSED LAWS.
>> FOR SO MANY NEW JERSEY
FAMILIES, THEY JUST CAN'T AFFORD
IT.
>> Reporter: STATE SENATOR JOE
VITALE IS A SPONSOR OF NEW
JERSEY'S BILL.
IT WOULD MANDATE MOST DOCTORS TO
PARTICIPATE IN THE SAME NETWORKS
AS THE HOSPITAL, REQUIRE DOCTORS
AND HOSPITALS TO NOTIFY PATIENTS
IF THEY ARE NOT IN NETWORK, BAN
DOCTORS FROM BALANCE BILLING AND
SET UP AN ARBITRATION SYSTEM TO
PRESS PROVIDERS TO DEFEND THEIR
BILLS, AND INSURERS TO DEFEND
THEIR RATES.
>> IN THE END, THERE'S GOING TO
BE AN UNDERSTANDING, YOU KNOW,
WHAT BILL IS GOING TO BE FAIR,
AND WHAT REIMBURSEMENT WILL BE
FAIR.
AND IF YOU ARE EXTREME IN EITHER
ONE OF THOSE CIRCUMSTANCES--
WHETHER YOU'RE THE PROVIDER OR
THE DOCTOR OR THE INSURANCE
COMPANY-- YOU'RE NOT GOING TO
WIN.
>> Reporter: BUT AFTER YEARS OF
PRESSURE FROM CONSUMER GROUPS,
AND NEGOTIATIONS, INCLUDING A
STATE ASSEMBLY HEARING THIS PAST
WEEK, THE BILL HAS GONE NOWHERE.
WHY HASN'T THIS PASSED?
>> WELL THE INTEREST GROUPS,
WHETHER IT'S THE HOSPITAL
SYSTEM, OR THE MEDICAL SOCIETY,
OR THE INSURANCE COMPANY, WE
KIND OF TRY TO, WE GET TO WHERE
WE'RE CLOSE TO AN AGREEMENT,
SUDDENLY THE GOALPOST SHIFTS A
LITTLE BIT.
>> Reporter: SO UNTIL NEW JERSEY
PASSES A LAW, PATIENTS LIKE
LEIGH LEHMAN ARE LARGELY ON
THEIR OWN.
THE HOSPITAL WHERE LEHMAN HAD
HIS BYPASS WOULDN'T DISCUSS THE
SPECIFICS OF HIS CASE, BUT SAID,
MORE THAN 90% OF ITS PHYSICIANS
ACCEPT THE SAME INSURANCE THAT
IT DOES, AND, IT INFORMS
PATIENTS ABOUT THE OTHER DOCTORS
WHO MAY NOT.
AFTER NEWSHOUR CONTACTED AETNA,
LEHMAN'S INSURER, THE COMPANY
REVIEWED HIS CASE.
IT TOLD US LEHMAN WAS NOT, IN
FACT, RESPONSIBLE FOR THE $2,200
BALANCE BILL HE RECEIVED.
AND THAT IT WILL BE REIMBURSING
HIM FOR WHAT HE PAID.
BUT, LEHMAN IS STILL PAYING OFF
THAT EARLIER $4,500 EMERGENCY
ROOM BILL.
>> IT GETS A LITTLE CRAZY.
IT GETS TO THE POINT WHERE
YOU'RE RELUCTANT TO GO SEE THE
DOCTOR.
>> Thompson: READ MORE STORIES
ABOUT SURPRISE MEDICAL BILLS
ONLINE AT pbs.org/newshour.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SUNDAY.
>> Thompson: IN CALIFORNIA, A
WILDFIRE RAGING SINCE THURSDAY
HAS NOW CONSUMED 200 HOMES,
INCLUDING THAT OF AN ELDERLY
COUPLE WHO DIED.
MORE THAN 1,700 FIREFIGHTERS,
TAKING ADVANTAGE OF LIGHT WINDS
TODAY, ESTABLISHED A PERIMETER
AROUND THE 58-SQUARE MILE BLAZE,
WHICH IS ONLY 10% CONTAINED.
2,500 HOMES ARE THREATENED BY
THE FIRE, AN HOUR EAST OF
BAKERSFIELD AND TWO HOURS NORTH
OF LOS ANGELES.
PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS DECLARED A
STATE OF EMERGENCY IN THREE WEST
VIRGINIA COUNTIES OVERWHELMED BY
FLOODING, TRIGGERED BY 10 INCHES
OF RAIN OVER TWO DAYS LAST WEEK.
THE DECLARATION WILL ALLOW
RESIDENTS WHO LOST THEIR HOMES
TO APPLY FOR AID FROM THE
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
AGENCY.
AT LEAST 24 PEOPLE DIED IN THE
DELUGE.
18,000 HOMES AND BUSINESSES IN
WEST VIRGINIA WERE STILL WITHOUT
POWER TODAY.
EIGHT SURVIVORS OF THE MASS
SHOOTING AT A GAY NIGHTCLUB IN
ORLANDO, TWO WEEKS AGO TODAY,
ARE STILL BEING TREATED FOR
GUNSHOT WOUNDS AT THE ORLANDO
REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER.
YESTERDAY, THEY RECEIVED A
SPECIAL GROUP OF VISITORS FROM
BOSTON, TEN SURVIVORS OF THE
2013 BOSTON MARATHON BOMBING.
BOSTON SURVIVOR CELESTE CORCORAN
SAID, PEOPLE WHO TRY TO SPREAD
HATE DO THE OPPOSITE, THAT HATE
BRINGS TOGETHER STRANGERS AND
MAKES US MORE TOLERANT OF
PEOPLE.
THERE WAS A MOMENT OF SILENCE TO
RECOGNIZE THE 49 PEOPLE KILLED
AND 53 WOUNDED IN THE ORLANDO
MASS SHOOTING AT THE START OF
TODAY'S GAY PRIDE PARADE IN NEW
YORK CITY.
MORE THAN 1.5 MILLION PEOPLE
WERE EXPECTED TO ATTEND THE 46th
ANNUAL CELEBRATION OF THE CITY'S
GAY, LESBIAN, BISEXUAL AND
TRANSGENDER COMMUNITIES.
AND THERE WAS A HEAVIER THAN
USUAL POLICE PRESENCE.
SAN FRANCISCO, SEATTLE, CHICAGO,
CITIES HOLDING PRIDE PARADES
THIS WEEKEND.
JUNE IS GAY PRIDE MONTH.
>> AND FINALLY TONIGHT, THE
ITALIAN COAST GUARD SET IT
RECOGNIZE NIGHT MORE THAN 3,000
MIGRANTS ON THE MEDITERRANEAN
SEA, 25 RUBBER DINGHIES WHO
DRIFTED 25 MILES NORTH OF THE
LIBYAN COAST.
ITALY HAS RECEIVED 2500
IMMIGRANTS BY COAST.
>>> THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION
OF PBS NewsHOUR WEEKEND, I'M
MEGAN THOMPSON, GOOD NIGHT.